# Exploring the nuance behind Tree Equity Score
## Sam Marshall

This Earth Engine App was created as an offshoot of an [earlier effort](https://github.com/gsmarshall/urban_greenspace) to reproduce the Tree Equity Score analysis of urban tree cover in New England. [Tree Equity Score](https://treeequityscore.org/) is a project created by the nonprofit American Forests that aims to determine the relative need for tree planting in each neighborhood in every city in the U.S. It has many strengths, but lacks nuance. This app examines the complex relationships between four of the components of Tree Equity Score (canopy cover, land surface temperature, nonwhite population, and low income population) in New York City.

Tree Equity Score quantifies the equity of green space distribution using a multi-criteria analysis that incorporates tree canopy cover, demographic and socioeconomic data from the U.S. Census, health survey data from the CDC, and temperature data from the USGS. It is constructed by setting a canopy cover goal for each block group, calculating how the existing canopy cover compares to this goal, and then determining how much of a priority tree planting in that block group is based on its demographic makeup, economic makeup, and temperature. Existing scientific literature suggests that the factors that go into the priority score can be correlated with each other, and in recent years journalism from publications like the New York Times has put a spotlight on the ways that tree cover is related to race, income, urban heat, and the historical inequities that influence the distribution of those phenomena. The construction of Tree Equity Score is interesting as a multi-criteria analysis because the possible correlations between its components are seemingly an intentional part of its design: by including several potentially correlated variables in one metric it seeks to represent the ways that racism and income inequality can create compounding impacts on urban tree cover and the lives of the people that live in cities. 

However, by collapsing the distribution of urban trees down to a single number this approach obscures many of the complex relationships between its component parts as well as the nuanced ways in which those components are linked with social and environmental equity. Although the popular media narrative highlights strong associations between the racial and economic composition, tree cover, and temperature patterns of different city neighborhoods, recent geographic literature suggests that the strength and direction of these relationships can vary widely between cities, parts of cities, and when examined with different units of analysis. This app aims to examine Tree Equity Score with this literature in mind by visualizing the individual relationships between race, income, tree cover, and temperature, with the goal of highlighting how complex and geographically specific the issue of urban tree cover and its connection to environmental justice is. It is not indended to discount the usefulness of Tree Equity Score, only to spotlight how important local knowledge and careful planning are to creating a more just and equitable urban landscape.


